v1 of the Spark Retrieval Success Rate SLI definition (#1)
filecoin-project/service-classes: service-level-indicators/spark-retrieval-success-rate.md

# Spark Request-Based (Non-Committee) Global Retrieval Success Rate <!-- omit from toc -->

- [Meta](#meta)
  - [Document Purpose](#document-purpose)
  - [Versions](#versions)
  - [Support, Questions, and Feedback](#support-questions-and-feedback)
- [TL;DR](#tldr)
- [Spark Protocol](#spark-protocol)
  - [Deal Ingestion](#deal-ingestion)
  - [Task Sampling](#task-sampling)
    - [**Which of the tasks in the Round Retrieval Task List should each Checker perform?**](#which-of-the-tasks-in-the-round-retrieval-task-list-should-each-checker-perform)
    - [**How does the protocol orchestrate the Spark Checkers to perform different tasks from each other at random  such that each Task is completed by at least $m$ checkers?**](#how-does-the-protocol-orchestrate-the-spark-checkers-to-perform-different-tasks-from-each-other-at-random--such-that-each-task-is-completed-by-at-least-m-checkers)

>     - [**How many tasks should each checker do per round? What value is given to $k$?**](#how-many-tasks-should-each-checker-do-per-round-what-value-is-given-to-k)

Reviewer: Why are these bold?

Author: They were bolded because they were headings with bold down below. (and the toc is autogenerated)  That said, I just kept them bold now and removed their heading.  Resolving

There are two final steps in the Spark protocol that pertain to how Spark checkers get rewarded for their endeavors. However, this is not important for this page where we simply want to know how the Spark RSR is calculated. You can find more details about the reward steps at [https://docs.filspark.com](https://docs.filspark.com).

# Spark RSR Calculations

## High level Spark RSR Figure

At this point of the protocol, we have a set of valid measurements for each round stored off chain and committed to on chain for verifiability. From this we can calculate the Spark RSR values.

Given a specific timeframe, the top level Spark RSR figure is calculated by taking the number of all successful valid retrievals made in that time frame and dividing it by the number of all “contributing” valid retrieval requests made in that time frame.  When we say “contributing” retrieval requests, we mean all valid successful retrieval requests as well as all the valid retrieval requests that failed due to some issue on the storage provider’s end or with IPNI.  (See [Retrieval Result Mapping to RSR](#retrieval-result-mapping-to-rsr) for a detailed breakdown of failure cases that are “contributing”.)

> 

Reviewer: GitHub flavored markdown throws a syntax error on this code block

**How does the protocol orchestrate the Spark Checkers to perform different tasks from each other at random  such that each Task is completed by at least $m$ checkers?**

As previously mentioned, the checkers start each round by downloading the Round Retrieval Task List. For each task that’s in the List, the checker calculates the task’s “key” by SHA256-hashing the task together with the current dRand randomness, fetched from the [dRand network API](https://github.com/filecoin-station/spark-evaluate/blob/a231822d3d78e3d096425a53a300f8c6c82ee01f/lib/drand-client.js#L29-L33). Leveraging the wonderful properties of cryptographic hash functions, these hash values will be randomly & uniformly distributed in the entire space of $2^{256}$ values. Also, by including the randomness in the input alongside the Eligible Deal details, we will get a different hash digest for a given Eligible Deal in each round. We can define the `taskKey` as

```jsx

> taskKey = SHA256(payloadCid || miner_id || drand)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
taskKey = SHA256(payloadCid + miner_id + drand)
```

There are two final steps in the Spark protocol that pertain to how Spark checkers get rewarded for their endeavors. However, this is not important for this page where we simply want to know how the Spark RSR is calculated. You can find more details about the reward steps at [https://docs.filspark.com](https://docs.filspark.com).

# Spark RSR Calculations

## High level Spark RSR Figure

At this point of the protocol, we have a set of valid measurements for each round stored off chain and committed to on chain for verifiability. From this we can calculate the Spark RSR values.

Given a specific timeframe, the top level Spark RSR figure is calculated by taking the number of all successful valid retrievals made in that time frame and dividing it by the number of all “contributing” valid retrieval requests made in that time frame.  When we say “contributing” retrieval requests, we mean all valid successful retrieval requests as well as all the valid retrieval requests that failed due to some issue on the storage provider’s end or with IPNI.  (See [Retrieval Result Mapping to RSR](#retrieval-result-mapping-to-rsr) for a detailed breakdown of failure cases that are “contributing”.)

$$

> RSR = {\# successful \over \# successful + \# failure}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
RSR = {count(successful) \over count(successful) + count(failure)}
```

  - [FAQ](#faq)
    - [Why is graphsync used?](#why-is-graphsync-used)
    - [What improvements are planned for Spark retrieval checking?](#what-improvements-are-planned-for-spark-retrieval-checking)
    - [Why do checkers report back the storage clients that made the deal?](#why-do-checkers-report-back-the-storage-clients-that-made-the-deal)
    - [Why do IPNI outages impact SP RSR?](#why-do-ipni-outages-impact-sp-rsr)

# Meta

## Document Purpose

This document is intended to become the canonical resource that is referenced in [the Storage Providers Market Dashboard](https://github.com/filecoin-project/filecoin-storage-providers-market) wherever the “Spark Retrievability” graphs are shown.  A reader of those graphs should be able to read this document and understand the “Spark Retrievability SLO”.  The goal of this document is to explain fully and clearly “the rules of the game”.  With the “game rules”, we seek to empower market participants - onramps, aggregators and Storage Providers (SPs) - to “decide how they want to play the game”.

## Versions

TODO: add a table that shows Spark RSR version 1 is supported by which backend component versions.

> When we have v1.1, this would be a new row in a table, with a new set of backend cmponents.  

Reviewer: I'm not sure how to answer this - and where Spark RSR version 1 even starts. Shall we say that the current service git commits are the first ones?

Author: I think it's fine to say that the current service commits are the first ones.

During each round, the Spark Checkers are able to download the current Round Retrieval Task List. You can see the current Round Retrieval Task List here: [http://api.filspark.com/rounds/current](http://api.filspark.com/rounds/current). 

### **Which of the tasks in the Round Retrieval Task List should each Checker perform?**

A simple approach for testing all tasks in the Round Retrieval Task List would be to ask all Spark Checkers (i.e., currently people who are running [Filecoin Station](https://filstation.app)) to check whether or not they can complete each Retrieval Task in the round, by attempting to retrieve the CID from the Storage Provider. However, there are many thousands of Spark Checkers and it would be wasteful to ask them all to test every task in each round. This would also create a lot of unnecessary load on the SPs.

> At the other end of spectrum, the protocol could ask only one Spark Checker to complete each Retrieval Task in the Round Retrieval Task List. This is also not advisable as we cannot trust individual Spark Checkers to act honestly, nor can we trust their internet connection to be 100% reliable even if they do act honestly. If we trusted the results of individual checkers then you can imagine an adversary, who wants only a certain SP to prosper, to report positive results for that SP, and negative results for all other SPs. We need multiple checkers to perform each Retrieval Task so that the results can be compared.

Reviewer: >  This is also not advisable as we cannot trust individual Spark Checkers to act honestly, **nor can we trust their internet connection to be 100% reliable** even if they do act honestly.

This is not just about the internet connection, this is about network partitions and other arbitrary failures outside of the checker's and the SP's control.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At the other end of spectrum, the protocol could ask only one Spark Checker to complete each Retrieval Task in the Round Retrieval Task List. This is also not advisable as we cannot trust individual Spark Checkers to act honestly, and even if, there are other factors outside of both the checker's and the SP's control - for example network partitions. If we trusted the results of individual checkers then you can imagine an adversary, who wants only a certain SP to prosper, to report positive results for that SP, and negative results for all other SPs. We need multiple checkers to perform each Retrieval Task so that the results can be compared.
```

> The current approach lies between these two ends of the spectrum. By asking a subset of Spark Checkers to perform each of the Retrieval Tasks in the round, we can test far more deals in each round, avoid unnecessarily load-testing an SP for one CID, while having enough Checkers perform the same test to build confidence in the result. Specifically, our confidence here is based on assumptions about what percentage of the network of checkers in acting honestly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The current approach lies between these two ends of the spectrum. By asking a subset of Spark Checkers to perform each of the Retrieval Tasks in the round, we can test far more deals in each round, avoiding unnecessarily load-testing an SP for one CID, while having enough Checkers perform the same test to build confidence in the result. Specifically, our confidence here is based on assumptions about what percentage of the network of checkers is acting honestly.
```

### **How does the protocol orchestrate the Spark Checkers to perform different tasks from each other at random  such that each Task is completed by at least $m$ checkers?**

> As previously mentioned, the checkers start each round by downloading the Round Retrieval Task List. For each task that’s in the List, the checker calculates the task’s “key” by SHA256-hashing the task and the current dRand randomness, fetched from the [dRand network API](https://github.com/filecoin-station/spark-evaluate/blob/a231822d3d78e3d096425a53a300f8c6c82ee01f/lib/drand-client.js#L29-L33). Leveraging the wonderful properties of cryptographic hash functions, these hash values will be randomly & uniformly distributed in the entire space of $2^{256}$ values. Also, by including the randomness in the input alongside the Eligible Deal details, we will get a different hash digest for a given Eligible Deal in each round. We can define the `taskKey` as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As previously mentioned, the checkers start each round by downloading the Round Retrieval Task List. For each task that’s in the List, the checker calculates the task’s “key” by SHA256-hashing the task together with the current dRand randomness, fetched from the [dRand network API](https://github.com/filecoin-station/spark-evaluate/blob/a231822d3d78e3d096425a53a300f8c6c82ee01f/lib/drand-client.js#L29-L33). Leveraging the wonderful properties of cryptographic hash functions, these hash values will be randomly & uniformly distributed in the entire space of $2^{256}$ values. Also, by including the randomness in the input alongside the Eligible Deal details, we will get a different hash digest for a given Eligible Deal in each round. We can define the `taskKey` as
```

```jsx

> taskKey = SHA256(payloadCid || miner_id || drand)

Reviewer: for my understanding, does `||` mean concatenation in this context?

Author: I actually don't know what `||` means in this case.  @patrickwoodhead or @bajtos ?

Reviewer 2: Yeah this means concatenation here. I was going to just use a comma in stead of the two pipes, but didn't want to give the impression of three separate arguments passing into the SHA256 hash function

Reviewer 2: We could change to + instead of || ?

Author: I see you fixed it to "+".  Looks good to me.  Resolving

```

> Each Spark Checker node can also calculate the SHA256 hash of its Station Id. This is fixed across rounds as it doesn’t depend on any round-specific inputs. (In the future, the protocol may add the drand value into the hash input of the nodeKey too.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each Spark Checker node can also calculate the SHA256 hash of its Station Id. This is fixed across rounds as it doesn’t depend on any round-specific inputs. In the future, the protocol may add the drand value into the hash input of the nodeKey too.
```

```jsx
nodeKey = SHA256(station_id)
```

> The checker can then find its $k$ “closest” tasks, using XOR as the distance metric. These $k$ tasks are the Retrieval Tasks the Spark Checker node is eligible to complete.  Any other tasks submitted by the checker are not evaluated or rewarded.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The checker can then find its $k$ “closest” tasks, using XOR as the distance metric. These $k$ tasks are the Retrieval Tasks the Spark Checker node is eligible to complete. Any other tasks submitted by the checker are dismissed.
```

The tasks are evaluated, and the result of evaluation is rejection

```jsx
dist = taskKey XOR nodeKey
```

> Note that, at the start of each round, the protocol doesn’t know which Spark Checkers will participate as there are no uptime requirements on these checkers. This means the Spark protocol can’t centrally form groups of checkers and assign them a subset of the Round Retrieval Task List. The above approach doesn’t make any assumptions about which checkers are online, but instead relies on the fact that the `nodeKeys` will be evenly distributed around the SHA256 hash ring.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that, at the start of each round, the protocol doesn’t know which Spark Checkers will participate as there are no uptime requirements on these checkers. This means the Spark protocol can’t centrally form groups of checkers and assign them a subset of the Round Retrieval Task List. The above approach doesn’t make any assumptions about which checkers are online, but instead relies on the fact that the `nodeKeys` will be evenly distributed around the SHA256 hash ring, and gambles for there to be enough nodes that will be assigned to each task.
```

Reviewer 2: I think gambles is a strong word here

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that, at the start of each round, the protocol doesn’t know which Spark Checkers will participate as there are no uptime requirements on these checkers. This means the Spark protocol can’t centrally form groups of checkers and assign them a subset of the Round Retrieval Task List. The above approach doesn’t make any assumptions about which checkers are online, but instead relies on the fact that the `nodeKeys` will be evenly distributed around the SHA256 hash ring, so that enough nodes will be assigned each task.
```

> Following the above approach, for each Retrieval Task, there are a set of Checkers who find this task among their $k$ closest and they will attempt the task in the round. We refer to the set of checkers who attempt a Retrieval Task as the “[Committee](#committee) ” for that task. Since we are hashing over a random value for each task when we create its `taskKey`, this approach mitigates against one party controlling an entire committee and dominating the honest majority consensus decision later in the protocol.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Following the above approach, for each Retrieval Task, there are a set of Checkers who find this task among their $k$ closest and they will attempt the task in the round. We refer to the set of checkers who attempt a Retrieval Task as the “[Committee](#committee)” for that task. Since we are hashing over a random value for each task when we create its `taskKey`, this approach mitigates against one party controlling an entire committee and dominating the honest majority consensus decision later in the protocol.
```

Reviewer: Also, I'm not sure we need to mention this attack vector here? Or is it a good place?

```suggestion
Following the above approach, for each Retrieval Task, there are a set of Checkers who find this task among their $k$ closest and they will attempt the task in the round. We refer to the set of checkers who attempt a Retrieval Task as the “[Committee](#committee) ” for that task.
```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Following the above approach, for each Retrieval Task, there are a set of Checkers who find this task among their $k$ closest and they will attempt the task in the round. We refer to the set of checkers who attempt a Retrieval Task as the “[Committee](#committee)” for that task..
```

### **How many tasks should each checker do per round? What value is given to $k$?**

> The choice of $k$ is determined by Spark protocol logic that aims to keep the overall number of Spark measurements completed by the total network per round fixed. This is important because we don’t want the number of requests that Storage Providers need to deal with go up as the number of Spark Checkers in the network increases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The choice of $k$ is determined by Spark protocol logic that aims to keep the overall number of Spark measurements completed by the total network per round fixed.

This is important because
- We don’t want the number of requests that Storage Providers need to deal with go up as the number of Spark Checkers in the network increases
- There need to be enough nodes in each committee for its result to be considered reliable
```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The choice of $k$ is determined by Spark protocol logic that aims to keep the overall number of Spark measurements completed by the total network per round fixed.
This is important because
- We don’t want the number of requests that Storage Providers need to deal with to go up as the number of Spark Checkers in the network increases
- There needs to be enough nodes in each committee for its result to be considered reliable
```

In each round, the [Round Retrieval Task List data object](http://api.filspark.com/rounds/current) specifies $k$ in a field called `maxTasksPerNode`. At the start of each round, the [spark-api](https://github.com/filecoin-station/spark-api) service looks at the number of measurements reported by the network in the previous round, compares it against the desired value, and adjusts both maxTaskPerNode $k$ and the length of the Round Retrieval Task List for the new round.

> The choices in each round for $k$ and the length of the Round Retrieval Task List also determine the size of the committee for each Retrieval Task. This is how we ensure each task is completed by at least $m$ checkers; the committee for each task is designed to include [between 40 and 100 checkers](https://www.notion.so/745b0e1020bb4000ac77acafee09e683?pvs=21) to make sure there are enough Measurements to add mitigations against malicious actors, but not too many that we load test the Storage Providers.

Reviewer: > The choices in each round for $k$ and the length of the Round Retrieval Task List also determine the size of the committee for each Retrieval Task.

They don't determine the size of committees, as committees are formed later. They _influence_ the size, right?

```suggestion
The choices in each round for $k$ and the length of the Round Retrieval Task List also influence the size of the committee for each Retrieval Task. This is how we ensure each task is completed by at least $m$ checkers; the committee for each task is designed to include [between 40 and 100 checkers](https://www.notion.so/745b0e1020bb4000ac77acafee09e683?pvs=21) to make sure there are enough Measurements to add mitigations against malicious actors, but not too many that we load test the Storage Providers.
```

The Spark Checkers that are members of each committee will go on to make the same [retrieval checks](#retrieval-checks) in the round. Each committee member then publishes their results to the Spark API (see [Reporting Measurements to Spark-API](#reporting-measurements-to-spark-api)), which then calculates the honest majority consensus about the result of the Retrieval Task (see [Evaluating Measurements with Spark-Evaluate](#evaluating-measurements-with-spark-evaluate)).

> Only the $k$ tasks that have been assigned to a checker in each round are treated as valid and included in the Spark RSR calculation, all others are ignored. This also means Spark checkers only get rewarded for their specified tasks each round.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Only the $k$ tasks that the reproducible checker task selection algorithm picks in each round are treated as valid and included in the Spark RSR calculation, all others are ignored. This also means Spark checkers only get rewarded for their specified tasks each round.
```

Tasks aren't assigned to checkers, checkers pick tasks according to a deterministic algorithm. This might be nuanced but important.

Reviewer: > This also means Spark checkers only get rewarded for their specified tasks each round.

What does this mean? If it means what I think it does (checkers only get rewarded for the tasks that they should work on), I think it can be removed as redundant

Author: Good fixes.  I agree the line can be removed.  I'm handling now.

3. Filter the response to find the provider identified by `PeerID` found in Step 1 and obtain the multiaddr(s) where this provider serves retrievals.
4. Retrieve the root block of the content identified by `CID` from that multiaddr using Graphsync or the [IPFS Trustless Gateway protocol](https://specs.ipfs.tech/http-gateways/trustless-gateway/) (over HTTP). It uses the protocol advertised to IPNI for the retrieval. If both protocols are advertised, then it chooses HTTP.
5. Verify that the received block matches the `CID`.

## Reporting Measurements to Spark-API

When the Spark Checkers have completed a retrieval and determined whether or not the CID is retrievable by following the above steps, they report their result, which we call a measurement to the Spark-API service. Spark-API ingests these measurements, batches them into chunks of up to 100k measurements, uploads each chunk to [web3.storage](http://web.storage) (now Storacha), and commits the batch CID to the Spark [smart contract](https://github.com/filecoin-station/spark-impact-evaluator). We call this the [Spark-Publish logic](https://github.com/filecoin-station/spark-api/tree/main/publish).

<aside>
ℹ️

> Failed retrieval attempts are also reported with a reason code for the failure reason.  Failure reasons and how they map to RSR are covered in [Retrieval Result Mapping to RSR](#retrieval-result-mapping-to-rsr).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Failed retrieval attempts are also reported with a reason code for the failure reason. Failure reasons and how they map to RSR are covered in [Retrieval Result Mapping to RSR](#retrieval-result-mapping-to-rsr).
```

</aside>

## Evaluating Measurements with Spark-Evaluate

> [Spark-Evaluate](https://github.com/filecoin-station/spark-evaluate) is the Spark service that evaluates each measurement to decide whether or not it is valid. It listens out for on-chain events that indicate that the Spark Publish logic has posted a commitment on chain. It then takes the CID of the on chain commitment and fetches the corresponding measurements from Storacha.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Spark-Evaluate](https://github.com/filecoin-station/spark-evaluate) is the Spark service that evaluates each measurement to decide whether or not it is valid, and then further processes the valid results for later consumption. It listens out for on-chain events that indicate that the Spark Publish logic has posted a commitment on chain. It then takes the CID of the on chain commitment and fetches the corresponding measurements from Storacha.
```

Once Spark-Evaluate retrieves the measurements, it does “fraud detection” to remove all unwanted [Retrieval Task Measurement](#retrieval-task-measurement)s as summarized below:

| [Retrieval Task Measurement](#retrieval-task-measurement)s which are removed | Why removed? |
| --- | --- |
| Those for [Eligible Deal](#eligible-deal)s not in the round | To prevent checkers from checking any [Eligible Deal](#eligible-deal) of their choosing either to inflate or tarnish an SP’s stats. |

> | Those which are for [**Retrieval Task**](#retrieval-task)s that are not within the $k$-closest for a checker | Same principle as above.  It’s not good enough to pick any [**Retrieval Task**](#retrieval-task) from the [Round Retrieval Task List](#round-retrieval-task-list). |
> | Those which are submitted after the first $k$ measurements from a given IPV4 /24 subnet.
> (i.e, The first $k$ [Retrieval Task Measurement](#retrieval-task-measurement)  within a IPv4 /24 subnet are accepted.  Others are rejected.) | Prevent a malicious actor from creating tons of station ids that are then used to “stuff the ballot box” from one node. IPV4 /24 subnets are being used here as a scarce resource. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Those which are for [**Retrieval Task**](#retrieval-task)s that are not within the $k$-closest for a checker | Same principle as above.  It’s not good enough to pick any [**Retrieval Task**](#retrieval-task) from the [Round Retrieval Task List](#round-retrieval-task-list). |
| Those which are submitted after the first $k$ measurements from a given IPV4 /24 subnet. (i.e, The first $k$ [Retrieval Task Measurement](#retrieval-task-measurement)  within a IPv4 /24 subnet are accepted.  Others are rejected.) | Prevent a malicious actor from creating tons of station ids that are then used to “stuff the ballot box” from one node. IPV4 /24 subnets are being used here as a scarce resource. |
```

To fix table rendering (there must be no line breaks inside cells):

<img width="962" alt="Screenshot 2024-11-04 at 17 21 28" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/dddb40d7-5309-4bdc-b31f-b9a7b0461eb7">

> With these [Committee Accepted Retrieval Task Measurements](#committee-accepted-retrieval-task-measurements) that passed fraud detection, Spark Evaluate then performs the honest majority consensus.  For each task, it calculates the honest majority result from the task’s committee, and it stores this aggregated result in Spark’s DB.  These aggregate results are called [Provider Retrieval Result Stats](#provider-retrieval-result-stats).  They are packaged into a CAR which will is stored with Storacha, and the CID of this CAR is stored on chain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With these [Committee Accepted Retrieval Task Measurements](#committee-accepted-retrieval-task-measurements) that passed fraud detection, Spark Evaluate then performs the honest majority consensus.  For each task, it calculates the honest majority result from the task’s committee, and it stores this aggregated result in Spark’s DB. These aggregate results are called [Provider Retrieval Result Stats](#provider-retrieval-result-stats).  They are packaged into a CAR which will is stored with Storacha, and the CID of this CAR is stored on chain.
```
